[ Silence ]
[ Music ]
>> Regina Meredith: This
story takes us on a wild ride.
It's about a man who experienced
a rare kundalini awakening
and decided he wanted to spend
the rest of his life meditating,
to do that, he needed
enough money
to take the rest of his life of.
Understanding focus, awareness
he made millions of dollars
out of nothing which bought his
freedom to live as he wished.
From seminary school to
Asian bordellos to true love,
Marty Birrittella created
a life many only dream off
to what he says is just
listening and it is.
I love this book.
You know how we love just
kind of peeping it on,
on other people's
live sometimes.
That's what it's like because
this is-- this is bare.
>> Martin Birrittella: Yeah.
>> Regina: You don't-- you
have no gale in the book.
There's nothing held back.
It's not like you're
trying to position yourself
as an angel or a saint.
And yet at the same time you
have had a chance to rise
up into this incredibly
angelic experience as a result
of the path of listening.
But first of all, before
we get going yesterday--
>> Martin: OK.
>> Regina: -- we were-- we
shared a cabin from the airport
as we came in at the same time.
And it turns out, you
and the driver, Rob--
>> Martin: His brother, I played
football with in high school.
>> Regina: Yes.
>> Martin: We took
the same high school.
>> Regina: And it was like
listening to this little slice
of what I read in your
book about this life
and Tarrytown New York.
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: Your families
were intertwined,
your family's bread business,
he knew the bread
'cause his family was
in the restaurant business and--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: It was like a slice
of life from a certain era
in New York that only
you two could relate to.
I was just the observer.
It was really sweet
to listen to.
>> Martin: I was--
it was amazing.
It was amazing.
>> Regina: So, let's talk about
your life in Tarrytown just
to set the stage
for what happen,
because you're an
unlikely person to be--
well your background is unlikely
to be one who'd be spending
six hour a day meditating.
Today, but who's is, right,
if you're in the west.
>> Martin: Right.
That's true.
Well, the funny thing is
in this town, I grow up
and in my family
there were seven boys.
Everybody's name began with
an Ms. My mother had seven
cesareans and she was
very, I wouldn't say wild
but she was very strict.
Obviously everybody in
the town knew who we were,
picture was in the
paper a lot and on top
of that my dad has this baker
where everybody buys our
Italian bread all the time.
And it was just an
amazing place.
It's a beautiful place to
live and grow up there.
And me being the second the son,
the oldest was is going to go
into the bakery business but
I was like, "what could I do
and my dream in a-- probably
at that time I was seven years
old is I wanted to be a priest.
My aunt, my mother's sister
was a nun and I would go
down to a convent and see that.
My mother love to
church so much.
We have big rosaries
hanging in the house.
And I just loved
everything about the church.
It was like, I remember
announcing
to my second grade teacher,
I am going to be a priest
and by the time I
was 14 years old,
I went to the junior
seminary to be a priest.
>> Regina: So, that part of you
was already kicked in by birth.
I mean you came in
already wired toward--
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: -- wanting to
experience something of a--
a more ethereal or
exalted nature.
>> Martin: Right,
absolutely, absolutely.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: I mean I always
like to say, I fantasized
when I was a little kid maybe
9 or 10 years old sitting
in the church and probably
watching Robin Hood or something
on TV, I would imagine
myself swing from the balcony
and saving the priest
because the robbers came
on to the stage or something.
So, I had this fantasy going
out on my mind, you know,
there was sort of--
romantic quality to it
at the same time but, you know,
sure enough when I was 14,
you know, I ended up going
away to a Carmelite seminary
with just 50 kids in it away,
full time, you know, very,
very strict situation.
>> Regina: Oh you must have
made your mother very proud.
>> Martin: Oh she was so happy.
>> Regina: When I was
seven or eight years old.
I had dreams of becoming a
nun but I was a Lutheran--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- so I didn't really
understand what was involved
and after practicing
with my girlfriend,
all the things Catholics
are supposed to do,
I realized it was a lot of
work and I bailed a lot sooner
on that dream of
life that you did.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: So, seminary school.
What happened?
>> Martin: Well, it
was-- I loved it.
And I was very difficult
'cause I was going
through puberty at
the same time.
And there's a lot of
wild things, you know,
without getting into it,
there's a lot of wild things
that are going on there
because we would go
to mass every single morning
and you can't have any sins.
You have to go to confession.
I mean literally
to be with a priest
in the confession every morning.
When he wasn't there,
I have to go
down of my dorm,
knock on his door.
OK.
>> Regina: Were you
there every morning?
>> Martin: Well, no.
I wasn't there every morning,
but I tell you it's a
little traumatic just going
down there a couple of times
and not knocking on the door
and say, "Father, can you
hear my confession and kneel
down next to a bed of
a priest, you know.
>> Regina: Especially
with today's connotation.
>> Martin: Yeah, with
today's connotation with that,
specifically that's not--
wasn't happening but I did have
a guy end up falling in love
with me and the reason I
didn't go back to the seminary
in my second year because
he had sent me a love letter
and my mother intercepted it
and when my mother saw
that, she goes, that's it.
No, you cannot go back to
the seminary so I wouldn't--
right from my freshmen
year in high school right
into my Sleepy Hollow High
School which was in Tarrytown
and I knew all the
kids there already.
>> Regina: Football, do you.
>> Martin: Football, I was the
president of the junior class.
And you know, it was like,
I sort of had a normal life
from that point forward but I
internally, there was a part
of me 'cause I was crying
and crying, you know,
when I couldn't go
back to the seminary,
I really wanted to do that.
>> Regina: So divisional--
to be devoted to
something was really--
>> Martin: Oh yeah, it was--
>> Regina: -- high
wired into you.
>> Martin: It was high
wired into me and, you know,
I did really well in schools.
I end up going to Cornell
Engineering School.
When I was at Cornell,
I only really--
I lasted there for one year
because one of the things that I
like to say is that-- besides
everything being a field
of love, my experience,
everything is a field of love
that everything is
just movement.
And one day I was standing
at this war protest in front
of this famous building,
Willard Straight Hall at Cornell
and there was a march
over to the--
they were protesting [inaudible]
and some of the things
that are going on
at the university.
I ran into this building where
these people and they took
over this building and--
>> Regina: You spontaneously--
>> Martin: I just
spontaneously--
it's like something inside
of me just said, move,
go in this building and
instantly they're chaining
up the doors and
wallpapering everything.
There was just crazy
takeover and, you know,
within a few hours or 30,
riot polices coming down
and breaking the windows,
they're coming in,
but what happened was
since the president
of the university wasn't there,
we ended up holding on to
that building for--
for a whole week.
>> Regina: That made the news.
>> Martin: That made the news.
I was on news, and they
came to us and they said--
Attica, amount people or
listeners know what Attica was
but that was like maybe 9
months before that they sent
in 500 state troopers.
A lot of inmates got killed
there so they just said to us.
It's like, you either out
of this building by Friday,
if you're not we're sending
all these state troopers
down here, so were smart enough.
Even though they--
they held tripods set
up across the street taking
photographs of everybody.
And instead of getting
kicked out of school
which many people did, I just
left and dropped out of Cornell
and I went to work
as a construction worker
in Albany, New York.
>> Regina: But that's where
it really gets interesting.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: Let me just go back.
For a moment, my mind has
always wondered about this.
You put a bunch of young
pubescent boys together,
sequestered, cloistered,
no girls,
you can't have any interaction
with girls, how's a system
like that ever going to work?
I mean that just doesn't work.
>> Martin: Well, I don't
know if that's true.
I mean you can see like
in this Buddha's monastery
in the far east going to
Thailand and Indonesia
and places like there's like,
you know, hundred and hundreds
so that can totally work.
I just think it's--
it totally can work.
It's totally the
mindset of that.
It's just that, you know,
I'm hearing like everybody is
down in the basement,
sniffing glue
in mattresses and
stuff like that.
That's what's going on,
besides other activities.
>> Regina: Yeah, exactly.
>> Martin: You know,
but it's like, you know,
it is what it-- what are.
>> Regina: I mean, do
you think that's a--
do you think in general that's--
well, I guess it's highly
individualized as to
who that's going to work
for but it just seems
like it's a little
out of balance.
And you know, a lot
of people think,
get the distractions away,
separate the boys and girls
so they can concentrate
on their studies and such
but that's a really pivotal
period of life to be able
to start figuring things out.
>> Martin: Well, yeah--
>> Regina: The integration
could be--
>> Martin: I understand
but like, reading my book.
As you see there's like
the whole sexual thing
of what was going on within that
was very prevalent, starting.
And the thing that made
the biggest impact to me
when I was a little
kid, you know,
my brother was outside playing,
you know, nurse and doctor
and I was just a witness to
that and my mother got our hands
on us and she's like,
came upstairs
and I actually have a
title, one of the chapters,
so I'll cut it off,
you know, it was like--
and that was like imprinted
in my brain and my psyche,
you know, all the way through.
It's like all the
way growing up.
>> Regina: Bad image
to have implanted.
>> Martin: Right, right, so.
>> Regina: Yeah, yeah.
I was just wondering about
that because it just seems
like private schools with boys
and girls separated
produce interesting people.
I mean there's a lot of kind of
corkiness oftentimes in a mix.
>> Martin: It could be.
It could be.
>> Regina: So I just thought
I'd ask anyway or I can move on.
So, anyway, now you're
working construction.
>> Martin: I'm working
construction.
>> Regina: And you're living
in a little basement somewhere?
>> Martin: Yeah, a
guy picked me up,
hitchhiked in the New York state
for a while, he let me lived
in his garden apartment
basement next
to the Albany Medical Center
and I was living down there.
So in the winter time
everybody got laid off
for building the new
capital of New York State,
they call it Rockefeller's tomb.
There was like 3000
construction workers on the site
but in the winter time they
had to lay everybody off.
So it was just something
that came to me.
I was like, for some reason I
just started doing hatha yoga,
you know, real crazy, real
intensely a couple of hours--
>> Regina: You and your
construction worker buddies?
>> Martin: No, no, just me
and myself, just me and--
>> Regina: I kind of got that.
>> Martin: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
In a basement with a
little furnace next to me,
and you know, within six weeks
after doing that, one night--
after meditating and I was
lying in the savasana pose
like the corpse pose in my back
and immediately I end up going
and seeing this vision of
myself driving in a car
as a my brother's red
Camaro, red SS3 50 Camaro,
people know what that car is,
it's really, hard
car that he had.
Anyway, police then pulls me
over, I'm sitting my girlfriend,
he walks up to the car,
pulls out his revolver,
points at right up my face and
shoots and everything boom,
at that moment goes
in slow motion.
I just watched the bullet come
hit me right in my third eye.
Just it blows my head off
my awareness is still there,
so I'm sitting now within
the back sit of the car
and there's presence,
there's voice comes
to me saying you have 5
seconds so let's say good bye
to who you want to
say good bye to.
So the person I wanted to
say good bye to was my mother
and my high school girlfriend,
Cynthia [assumed spelling].
And as soon as I say good bye to
them I was instantly transported
into this field of blue
purple light that was the love
and the light and that thing was
so overwhelming I was just like,
even just thinking
about it right now,
it has an affect in me.
And I was in that light, as I
was in that light, I look down
and I could see myself lying on
the floor, so I was completely
out of my body and I knew from
that moment, I was like, "Hey,
I am-- I totally am not
in my body and that sort
of catapulted me into like,
"Well, I would only want to,
you know, explore
this whole yoga thing
because this really work.
You know, I'm reading,
Yogananda's book, "Autobiography
of Yogi" and then
within twelve months,
I'm living down in
Gainesville, Florida.
>> Regina: What was the
significance of giving you
that ultimatum and telling you,
you had to say goodbye
to two people?
>> Martin: Yeah, well, I mean
it took me a number of years
to figure that out
because I really--
there was this really strong
attachment to the mother
and my girlfriend,
to the female,
and to sort of transcend,
I think it was on internal,
the manifestation of that
experience was saying to me,
"Hey, you want to go into a like
a higher set of consciousness,
you have to let go with the
feminine and that just fit
in to my whole seminary thing
and what's going on with that.
Again, I'm totally supportive
with that whole belief system
happened to be, it's like bingo,
you know, that's
it, and I was like,
I'm down in Florida
going like, "Oh yeah,
this is what I want to do."
>> Regina: So the feminine was
a distraction on your level.
>> Martin: Yeah, it
was a distraction.
And you can see, you know,
I always talk about like
in most religious in
societies whether it's Islam
or Christianity or whatever,
there's a lot of like, man,
we just have to transcend
the whole sexual thing now.
You know that thing was like
going on inside of me so one
of the things that I did do
when I got down to Florida,
I started doing-- I
started meditating really
for the first time.
And I became celibate.
I was like, OK, I want
to become celibate
because maybe this will have
something to do with putting me
into an altered state.
From there, it didn't really
take very much time before I,
you know, had my head
blown off so to speak.
>> Regina: Right and you were--
that was about six months in?
>> Martin: Yeah.
That was about I
was down there--
I was down there and
I was meditating,
I was doing yogananda, so I
have self-realizations lessons
because like the guys I
was living with where--
having doing it for a year
and every Sunday we go
out this Mickey Singer who--
Michael Singer who's the author
of this book that's come up
recently, "Untethered Soul."
And we-- Mickey was probably
like in his twenties
at that time.
We're all meditating there,
whatever, but I was just jealous
because I wanted to-- they
were like a year ahead of me,
you know, it's like I wanted
to catch, I wanted to catch up.
So I went into this book store
of course in the University
of Florida and I
bought this book,
the title of the book was a
Macmillan Book was called Guru.
I go, "This is interesting so
I picked it up, took it home
and I read that book on a
Saturday morning and it was all
about this guy Muktananda
and his experiences
with his guru whose
name was Nityananda.
And it was such a detail,
such personal detail
of all the exercises and
the mantras and he used
and different worlds and
states that he went into
and I was just like, I couldn't
believe the guy was saying what
the mantra was because the
yoga that I was doing sacred.
>> Regina: Right,
you're not supposed to--
>> Martin: I said, I'm
not supposed to know
like he's saying this mantras
but anyway, after reading
that book, I was so charged,
you know, that, you know,
I was literally bouncing
off the wall,
the expression you're
bouncing off the wall.
It was like bouncing
off the wall.
So I have my little altar
set up so I sat down.
I mediate, I could
have mediated but I was
like almost like shaking.
Got up, went outside,
went for a long walk
and back again, sat down again.
There's so much energy
in my body.
I just couldn't take it.
I-- so it finally relaxed me.
I went into the kitchen and
I drank like a half a gallon
of milk and like five
peanut butter sandwiches,
that's the only thing--
>> Regina: Anchor you
until it backing down.
>> Martin: Just calm me down.
Just to calm me down.
And then I was like,
I'm not going to go back
and to meditate, I'm just going
to, just go sit on the couch
so I have to digest, you know,
I'm just like, OK, now I'm like.
So I'm sitting, yeah,
I'm sitting on this couch
and as I'm sitting on this
couch, over the next two
and a half hours, I go
into this unbelievable,
Kundalini experience where
initially my feet start
to heat up, really, really hot
and this heat spreads up my legs
and I lose all sensation
from my like my knees down
and finally this energy, you
know, comes up to the my waist,
lose all feeling and then
I'm hearing the mantra
that Muktananda used with
Nityananda which was guru om.
I start hearing the mantra.
>> Regina: Guru oma.
>> Martin: Guru om, guru om,
hearing this mantra going
out of my head, I'm going,
I'm kind of fascinated
at this point.
I was like, "Whoa!"
I was like, what's going on.
>> Regina: What's happening?
>> Martin: What's happening?
I was like I had
no expectations.
I don't know what
was going to happen.
And then at the very
base of my spine,
I could just feel this
contraction and upward po--
whenever I heard guru and when
I've relaxed om would come out
and then all of a sudden,
this is the craziest,
one of the craziest parts
I was literally breathing
in my left nostril.
I'm breathing out my right--
>> Regina: Without
covering them.
>> Martin: Without
doing anything.
I was like, I said I was going
like, you know, I put my hand
up to my mouth and going
like, "Wow, what is this?"
And then this energy started
every little bit was just go a
little bit of my body up
and down, up and down.
It was incredibly sexual.
It felt like this
energy was inside of me
and it was having sex with me
and I was just sitting
there, watching it.
It's probably like took maybe
an hour, 45 minutes to an hour,
every-- breathe in,
breathe out, in and out,
and finally the energy
made it to my chest.
When it hit my chest, it was
like the room was blew apart
with love, love that I
had never, ever even.
I mean the thought
was like, "Oh my God.
This is what love is."
You know, you would hear the
terminology love, this was--
my heart was-- and I
thought that was the end
of the experience but what
happen was, after I calm down,
of about 15 minutes, and one
time the New York Times came
to ask me-- the New York
Times reporter asked me
about this experience
and somehow I said,
I sounded like I got shot
in the heart with heroine,
I don't know what
that feels like
but that was what the
description was like really sort
of overwhelming, and
then the sensation.
The breathing started again
and the energy got
higher, it hits my throat.
It another half an
hour to get up there,
all feeling from that
whatever went from there
down was completely dead.
Although my eyes were
open, I was looking around.
I hit my throat and the way
I like to describe that is
if you go into a hall of
mirrors out in amusement park
and you see yourself
in every single mirror,
it's like I was basically
just everything was one,
I was everything in the room
and I thought that was the end
of the experience but no,
you know, and that took
like an another half an hour
and the energy start to break
through the roof of my mouth, it
felt like someone just pressing
on my palate and my eyes became
very focus and my third eye
and then my eyes rolled up
in my head and I was looking
up into this field of light
and was like, so ecstatic,
every breath was like some
sort of fume of light,
ecstasy was getting
higher and higher
like you're approaching orgasm,
that's really exactly
what the sensation like.
You got higher and higher
and then all of a sudden--
the only way I describe
it as if the roof
of the house is blown off in a
million volts of light and love,
hit the roof of my head and just
like went through my whole body
and every single pore in my body
was organisming at one time.
The electricity and
the sensation
of that is really indescribable.
I was probably into it for five
seconds, five to ten seconds
and the thought came, "Oh my
God, I'm leaving my body."
And with that incredible
fear and a part
of me willfully even though I
had loss all sensation threw
myself off the couch onto
the floor and my head--
I don't think I hit the coffee
table but I was like lying
on the floor, pounding, pounding
and the thought that
comes to me.
If this is yoga, I don't want
to have anything to do with it.
This will kill you.
So I was like stunned.
I was like so totally
gone and over like a 2
and a half hour period time.
That's what happened and I
would not mediate after that.
I would not mediate.
It took me four to six weeks.
I refused.
I mean I looked at ought through
the head with a yogananda
and Jesus and the other
guru is like, "Hey, man,
you guys, take a vacation.
Nothing-- nothing's getting
in front of you, you know?
>> Regina: Yeah, because
it was so completely
out of your control as well.
>> Martin: Oh yeah, I was
like this whole force is so--
I couldn't believe that
the power could be that.
That's one of the reason
I put power in the title,
really talking about this
force which is oh is there,
it's always movement,
it's always movement
that's happening,
it's always accessible,
we just have
to open ourselves
to receiving it.
>> Regina: Well, they just tell
me, sure people are saying,
what was that guru om.
>> Martin: Guru-- well,
I put that in my book.
I say put that in there because
actually the second book,
I wrote this book had
to experience the field
and I really encourage people
to do that, to do techniques,
and you know I'm a
little enthusiastic maybe
about what I did.
>> Regina: Yeah, maybe.
>> Martin: About what I do but
it's like sharing with them
like the different ways
you can access the field
which I say is always
there, and all we have
to is just bring ourselves to--
more our attention to do
different exercise to do it
>> Regina: So after
that you, OK-- so put--
you put all of you're
iconography of the--
>> Martin: Right
>> Regina: -- great
gurus of history away.
You were scared.
You went back to real life
I supposed for a little bit.
>> Martin: Well like
one factor about life
but you know what happens is
like something that's so--
it's like if you were
to do, a heavy duty drug
like you might say like
"We'll, I'll never going to do
that again" and then maybe 10
days later you're going like,
"you know, I wonder if I could--
I wonder if I could
do and not hurt myself
>> Regina: Right
>> Martin: So I ordered this--
Muktananda at the
time was in India.
I mean this guy is 10,000 miles
away and going like "Oh my god."
It's like I can't even
get close to this guy.
So the book that I ordered
was called So'ham Japa
which is just standard--
simple breath meditation.
So in the in breath, Ham on
the out and you just meet--
and the way he wrote the book
was great because he says
"You do it while you're eating,
sleeping, drinking, walking,
talking., working" whatever you
just do this mantra all the time
and I'm going like, "Well,
I think I can handle that.
I'm not going to die from
doing that but of course me--
>> Regina: Tended to go--
>> Martin: Come to go
overboard so I made this--
came in, I wanted to look
in control so said, OK,
I decided like on a
Saturday, I'm going to do this
for six, I'm going to commit.
I'm going to do this for six
hours like who would say?
But I said that.
I committed myself to do it for
six hour and I did it for six
and then I couldn't stop it.
It just started going
on so it's like.
You just try to watch
your breath for, you know,
five minutes or ten
minutes, it becomes,
it's difficult to hold it.
All of a sudden,
I couldn't stop it
and then those nights
I didn't stop sleeping.
I was sort of like in this
totally, you know, field.
I was like in this
ecstatic state,
had still been celibate
probably now for six month
with I look back and go,
"This must be part of it.
I was working for the
University of Florida Department
of Vegetable Crops, out in their
form and certain times I worked
in their lab and at one
I was like, you know,
analyzing the amount of
nitrogen in watermelon leaves.
And you know, I had my little
sitting on my little stool in--
in the laboratory and had Bunsen
burner with the leaves in there,
I'll be cooking them
and they'll be going
up through a little
twirly thing, you know,
and the gas will go
thought this meter
and I can see how
much nitrogen was.
All of a sudden I turn
the thing on immediately,
my breath would stop, you know,
my stomach would
distend a little.
I have this like sort of Kumbak,
you know, you're not breathing
and my eyes had rolled
up in my head
and for some reason
there were some witness,
some part of myself was
like watching this so that--
I always had to turn the burner
up because all of a sudden
that hole inside of the beaker
would start to turn black.
I turn it off just a nick of
time and then put another batch
in 'cause they were doing
all these different samples
and here I go again
so that experience--
>> Regina: So you
were now living--
you were living perpetually at
that time with that experience.
>> Martin: I was
living like it, yup!
And then went on
for like six weeks
and the big coup de grace
thing that stopped it, OK,
which was tied in to
my whole childhood
and everything else was this
woman who I didn't know sort
of approach me and said,
"Come over to my house"
and I was just like, you know,
I've just like if
anybody said anything
to me, I say, "OK, yes."
>> Regina: Yeah,
you're at, yeah.
>> Martin: If I manage this
in that state, it's
those movements.
It's like, OK, what do I do now,
and I go over there and she's
like at the end of the dinner,
pulls me into her bedroom
and start to have sex with me.
I mean there's nothing working.
I mean there's no funky, there's
nobody there and it was sort
of like, there's
nothing happened,
there's like nothing
is going on to sort
of like, "Wow," you know?
And that funny thing
was the thought came
in to my mind at that part.
It's like, I wonder if-- my
God, it doesn't work anymore.
You know, it's like
I never thought.
>> Regina: To my celibacy.
Too much celibacy.
>> Martin: Yeah,
too much celibacy.
It's like maybe I just turned
the thing off of together
so that's like I'm 20
years old at the time.
I'm going like, OK,
yeah I want this.
This thing feels great but
it's like I still want to see
if the equipment works.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: You know, and
so over the next few days
and I went home and basically,
you know, ran the equipment
and guess what, equipment
worked, all right, and it was--
I like to always say that,
you know, when you take--
play the game of shoots
and ladders, and I--
it almost as if, if
I hit, hit the ladder
that took me all the way
to the top, two steps away
from the final realization and
the next move was I hit this,
that the-- the slide and I
said it only took me six weeks
or whatever to go all
the way to the top.
You know when I came down it
has taken me 35 years to go
through that thing all the way
and have all these experiences
and everything that still,
you know, inside me--
>> Regina: Yeah
>> Martin: -- is really stored.
It's like, I don't
think we can really--
That's one of the reason why
I say be kind to ourselves,
be kind to yourself
because the movement,
the destiny of what
we're going to go
through is going to happen.
There's nothing that
you can do to stop it.
So to be mean to
yourself in anyway
if I do not do that, you know--
>> Regina: So you're--
that altered mystical
state you are in--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: Plunged and ended
you-- you're working physically,
physically everything was fine.
>> Martin: Right, right.
>> Regina: But what happened?
Why did one have to
interrupt the other?
>> Martin: I would, it
ends up-- part of me--
I think from a brain
chemistry stand point it's
like when you organism, it's
like your brain gets flooded
with dopamine and oxytocin
and all of a sudden, it stops.
It's more like, it's almost like
a reset, it's almost like going
up to your computer
and rebooting it.
And so all of a sudden,
the mind and the thoughts,
it was unbelievably 'cause prior
to that there was no thought.
It's almost just witnessing.
I would just be witnessing
my breath.
And all of a sudden I
say you have between 12
and 60,000 thoughts a day, boom.
As soon as that happen,
I was right back to 12
to 60,000 thoughts and I could
not-- I try to like stop.
I try to get rid of--
>> Regina: But somehow
it didn't work
>> Martin: Nothing,
it wouldn't work.
It wouldn't work.
I was supposed to transfer into
the University of Florida now
from my junior year of college
and I was like that seem
like a joke because after
these two experiences.
I was like who needs
to go out of college,
that's like the most
insane thing,
but I hightailed it out Florida.
I went back to work at the baker
with my dad and so I was like,
so I wanted some sort of
normalcy, I was just grabbing
out straws and I went back
there and I was terrified.
And muktananda was coming to
United States and I did not want
to see him 'cause I though
if he could do this to me
from that distance
that he saw me, I'd--
>> Regina: You're blaming him
when in fact it was you
connecting intentionally.
You used the tools.
>> Martin: Well, of course, but
I was thinking that, you know.
>> Regina: He was, yeah.
>> Martin: You know, they
always envisioned Cheever
as the Keller [assumed
spelling].
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: So, I thought, you
know, he's going to see me,
see me and go like
you screwed up.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: He's going to hit me
with some eyes and go, you know,
it's like fry me as
soon as he saw me.
So it took me, I went
through a real bad experience
with Cynthia, my high
school girlfriend and it was
like so devastating but then
as I finally go, I got to go.
I got to go get.
I got to go be with
the guru, Kuchi.
I know he's my guru--
I was actually walking around
with a button, he's face,
you know, delivering bread in
Tarrytown with a guru, you know.
>> Regina: On your chest.
>> Martin: You know, I'm
like-- and the guys are going,
"What the hell is that?"
I said, "That's my guru."
They go, "Yeah, right."
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: You know,
it's like crazy.
It's like, this guy
is out of his mind so.
>> Regina: So the interesting
thing was by taking yourself
out of that state, that's what
threw you into your journey
because you are then
trying to re-establish--
>> Martin: Exactly.
>> Regina: -- that connection
with the divine aspect
of yourself.
>> Martin: Oh totally, totally.
>> Regina: And so-- if you
have, you would have never gone
on this amazing journey,
had you not gone the ladder
and shoots from ladders.
>> Martin: That's
right, that's right.
>> Regina: So you
went down the ladder,
you ended up finding the
guru, you found the guru,
you ended up going
to Ashram [phonetic].
It was in Oakland?
>> Martin: It was
Oakland, that's right.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: It was in Oakland.
I went out there and I was
like the funny thing was it's
like now it's like so
repentant that I was on--
At first I will do anything
the guru tells me to do
and I got three days
off with my dad.
I said I'm flying out to
California, all right.
I was just going to
go out and come back
and then go back out again.
So I have my private meeting.
This is the first time
I physically meeting him
and he's sitting
in there, so the--
just allow me, just
translate he goes,
"Baba" that's what we called
him, he did not speak any,
any English and I said, "I
will do anything you want."
What do you want me to do?"
And he's like laughed, he
goes, "Stay this weekend."
He's like, hitting
me this teacup.
"Stay." I'm going
like, "I can't stay."
He's like, laughing,
"No, no, no, stay."
I'm like, you know, I left there
'cause I promised my dad I'd
come back.
You know, I said, "No, I'm
not going to-- I can't stay.
I said to Baba, I can't stay
but I'll end up coming back
but then when-- he just left the
room and he was like laughing
and laughing and laughing like
he was just reading my mind,
knowing I'm trying to surrender
and I can't do the
simplest thing
that he's telling
me to do, you know?
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: And of course, in the
flight back, I'm beating myself
up again like I waited
all this time
and I can't follow the guy
instructions, you know?
But then I did end up going out,
so I live there for six month
and just have like-- it
was amazing because--
>> Regina: Well, and you ended
up in an interesting position.
There seem to be a connection
between the two of you, right?
Kind of ended that--
you ended up closer
than most people do to a guru.
>> Martin: Well, the thing was
because of my bakery experience,
they put me in this tiny
little armor which is really
about the size of the stature.
It's very, very small, you
know, it had like three tables
and there might be five or
six stools and there was maybe
like 200 people that were
living in the Ashram at the time
and they had-- we're
having programs and--
the programs are
wild 'cause it was
like crazy kundalini
experiences.
People were like, you know, it
sounded like a jungle literally/
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: And people
are flying into--
I mean Muktananda would go
around and touch everybody
and just like light them
up like it was unreal,
and I was having a lot
of Kundalini experience,
but for the most part
I was like working.
I was living their full time
in this little place, you know?
And I had a number of
interaction with him
which were kind of funny.
One night he basically
was looking
for the person who's running
the place and he was looking
in from the outside of
the window in the dark
and I thought it was-- it was
in the bad section of Oakland
and they thought, I thought
somebody was robbing us
so I got a baseball
bat and I was like,
going over to the door,
opening the door like I'm going
to hit this guy,
it's Muktananda.
With no teeth coming
in like that,
he wanted one to kill somebody.
He's like, "Where is"--
you know, "Where is this
girl Tara [assumed spelling]?
You know, "Where is she?"
And I'm going, "I
don't, you know?
He doesn't even say that.
He just like almost
foaming at the mouth
and this other girl
runs in and he goes,
you know, "Where is Tara?"
And I go, "I don't know"
and she looks up, bothered,
and looks back at
me and she goes,
"That's the wrong
answer," you know.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: Like he
knew I knew that.
He knew where she was.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: He was--
you know, so by that--
it's like those types
of interactions.
>> Regina: Well, you ended up
as kind of a security guard--
>> Martin: Well, yeah.
>> Regina: -- so to speak
for the facility after that.
>> Martin: Well, a little bit.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: I look back--
You kind of you kept the order.
>> Martin: Yeah.
Yeah. And then, really
the most significant thing
that happened was
after I was there
for six months some girl walks
into the little juice bar
and says, "You want to
have some ice cream?"
And her name was Sherry [assumed
spelling] and three days later,
I'm sitting in the
evening program, all right,
sitting there, meditating
and I can hear this voice,
"Ask that girl to marry you."
I was like, "No way."
"No. Are you out of your minds?"
It's like, "Ask this
girl to marry you?"
So I actually got up
in darshan [phonetic],
everybody standing there
with their fruits or bananas
and flowers and everything,
a big one wine going
up to Muktananda.
I walked up to this
girl and I say,
you know, "Will you marry me?"
And she says, "Yes," all right.
Get to the final line and Baba's
like, he's hitting us like yes,
get married a very
nice wedding which is
like in two weeks, you know?
People don't even know
who this girl was.
It's like I hardly even
knew who this girl was.
And he used to like-- Baba used
to love to tell stories like,
"You can meet somebody in
the back of the darshan line
and get married when--
by the time you get to the
front of the darshan line."
So--
>> Regina: Well, you were
just going with the movement--
>> Martin: I was just
going with the flow.
>> Regina: -- following
your impulse.
>> Martin: That's right.
You know, it's like
listening to, you know,
when the force is moving
through me which is--
>> Regina: And that's the key.
You just listen.
>> Martin: That's right.
Listen. That's why I say just
listening and even the stuff
that I end up later doing with
business and everything else
which a lot of people
go like, "Wow.
Why would you do that?"
or just like a good
listener just to hear.
>> Regina: Oh, yeah.
So, now that you get married
after a period of time and--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- and there's
a miscarriages and so--
>> Martin: Right.
That's right.
>> Regina: -- you ultimately
have these two fantastic kids.
But, during all of
these, you go to India--
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: -- and there's
some other thing that's rising
in this.
And it's an important thing
to talk about because we have
to learn to be more nuance in
our thinking in my opinion.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: And that is, you
started hearing murmurings
that celibacy was taught.
At the ashram there
was no fraternization
between the men and
the women, right?
>> Martin: Yeah.
They sat at different sides.
>> Regina: Different sides--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- and it was
a celibate environment
and that was from
the guru, right?
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: And that yet you
started hearing and finding
out that that didn't
necessarily apply to the guru.
This is very upsetting to a lot
of people who followed anyone.
>> Martin: That's right.
That's right.
>> Regina: Tell us what happened
about that and about the woman--
the woman side of it, his
side of it and what you kind
of took away because you
were angry when you found
out he wasn't living
by his own rules.
>> Martin: Yeah.
Well, the one-- I think
the one funny incident
that happened in-- when I was
living in India was that coming
from New York was right at
that time that Son of Sam
with this mass murderer was
so I had killed like seven
or seven different couples.
He just go up and shoot
these people in the car, so.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: And one
night at the end
to this program,
Baba never came out.
He basically comes
out of the thing
and he's got these Newsweek
and Time Magazine and Son
of Sam is on the cover.
Now I know who Son of
Sam is 'cause I'm driving
through Harlem in the
middle of the night.
It was like-- and he's going,
"This guy is my guru brother."
"Hey, this guy is
my guru brother
because he is killing
people, OK."
He's shooting people, who
are doing what he referred
to "Buffalo [inaudible]"
which is basically
like animals having sex.
This is what Son of Sam assumed
like lovers that were in car.
Somebody was doing that
in the upper garden
of the ashram today.
You know, so to me, it's
like, "Whoa," you know.
>> Regina: Whoa!
>> Martin: He's like
such a strong stance, OK,
of against this whole thing.
So at that particular point,
I mean it sort of like
that just supported my
belief system but it wasn't
until after he came back to
United States right after that
and we were living in Boston.
He came to the Boston ashram
a couple of times, you know,
for three weeks each time.
That when he was there, that
right after that we ended
up having our kids and I found
out that this whole thing
was going down with him.
And there's like a lot of--
>> Regina: Then the girl--
>> Martin: The girl and
then there's a lot of--
you know, Liz Harris from
the New York magazine wrote
like a great article about
this stuff and there's some
of the other stuffs
that's on the line.
>> Regina: A lot of
exposes on [inaudible].
>> Martin: A lot of-- yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: A lot of exposes.
A lot of exposes
specific on him.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: But to me, with
my background and being this
and knowing the power
of the celibacy,
this is very, very
confusing to me.
The funny thing was
that the women
that I taught including my wife
and other people that were close
by they were actually
it was like, "Oh,
I wish she sleep with me."
You know, it's like, the way,
he walk around when he talk,
touch people, the
experiences that they have.
Can you imagine what they--
>> Regina: Well, 'cause they're
having spontaneous instances
of a bliss like experience,
right?
>> Martin: Who can
blame them-- yeah.
So it's like having sex with
him must be like unbelievable.
But to me I was more like,
well, he can't be walking
around in orange and holding up
this image and then doing that.
It's like, this is
crazy, you know?
I was like furious.
I wanted to like-- you know,
if I could get my hands on him,
I'd basically-- you know, I'd
really didn't know what's going
on and then as your-- what I
found out over the years, OK,
that I actually had
conversations with women
who had direct experiences
with him--
>> Regina: Uh-hmm.
>> Martin: -- and what
was going on there
which was much sweeter
and benign--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: -- than my
mind could conceive of.
And even at the very end of the
book, I basically sort of come
to this conclusion from my
own sexuality and experience
of what was really going
in there but it did take me
on because we haven't talked
about the businesses at all yet.
>> Regina: Well, that's
what we're coming to.
>> Martin: Yeah.
They took me on a whole thing.
>> Regina: Because
you were disappointed.
>> Martin: I was disappointed
and I really wanted
to figure it out.
And--
>> Regina: But interestingly,
if you look at it in hindsight,
what he was giving you by
way of experience as a group
and these individuals of his
practices and the meditations
and so forth had
extreme value obviously.
>> Martin: Yeah.
Obviously, yeah.
>> Regina: He was
a master of energy.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: And a really
blissful divine type of energy--
>> Martin: That's right.
>> Regina: -- on
some level, right?
>> Martin: Oh yeah.
>> Regina: He was able to
transfer that to other people.
>> Martin: Yeah.
Thousands of people, thousands
of people would say that.
>> Regina: Yes.
And so, we do this, we set
people up who might have--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- something of value
to offer and then they fall
down by their supposed own rules
and we want to immediately--
>> Martin: Crucify them.
>> Regina: -- obscure
them and crucify them.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: And so it took a
while before your thinking
started becoming a
little more cohesive
or nuanced in that area.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: So now, let's
talk about what happened next
because you have a wife.
>> Martin: I have a wife.
>> Regina: You're in Boston, you
have a couple of kids and now,
it's time to go make some money.
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: You had
to do something.
You can support this--
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: -- Get on
air and be alone, right?
>> Martin: Right.
That's right.
>> Regina: So let's talk about
how it originally happened.
I love this story.
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: And I remember--
because I remember
the companies.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: Well the--
I had a couple of job.
When I was managing that
ashram in Boston, you know,
I had other jobs on the outside
like selling insurance
and stuff like that.
But-- and then I worked for
this massage roller company
and just joined--
>> Regina: Kind of the Footsie
massage, the ones in the back?
>> Martin: Yeah, the Footsie
Roller massage something
like that.
>> Regina: Yeah that's right.
>> Martin: And then
the guy-- I basically--
the company that sales like
we took off in our company.
I real wanted to--
the guy want it
to sell it 'cause he
couldn't make a lot of money
but he wouldn't do it then
finally when he did sell it,
you know, he sold them
when the price is way down.
So, I said on my own it's
like what am I going to do?
So, I'm going, OK, let's
do a footwear company.
And the funny thing is--
you don't even know
anything about footwear.
It's OK, I know a little bit.
>> Regina: Why did
you choose footwear?
>> Martin: While we were
doing some massage sandals
at this company--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: -- OK, so I
knew a little bit about--
I could buy like 68
cents sandals from Taiwan
and sell them for 3 dollars
through CVS or Walgreens
and have them retail
for like 5 bucks.
>> Regina: Right, right.
>> Martin: OK, so
I knew a little bit
about the footwear business
and the two companies,
Rebook which was in Boston
and Paul Fireman knew nothing
about the footwear
business before he got
into starting Rebook.
And then L.A. Gear, Bob
Greenberg was a hairdresser
in the same town I was
living in at the time,
Newton but he was out in Venice.
Both of those guys
took companies
to a billion dollars in sales.
And they didn't know--
>> Regina: And they
didn't know anything.
So you were qualified too.
>> Martin: -- that's why
I said I was qualified.
I'm from Newton.
I know nothing about
the footwear business.
This must be perfect, you know?
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: So I basically--
and I saw I needed to come up.
So the name of the company
that we came up with was Ryka.
>> Regina: And you and your
wife started it together?
>> Martin: We-- that's right.
And RYKA, R-Y-K-A, my mother's
maiden name was Riker, R-I-K-E-R
but we go, "We need to
make it a little bit--
you know, European-look."
So we did R-Y-K-A and put
two umlauts over the A
to make it look like Haagen-Dazs
and those were the logos
on the back of the shoes.
And probably I'd say
only a year and a half
after starting the
idea of this company,
the company had no sales at all.
And we took the company
public on February 12th, 1988.
>> Regina: OK, so I
want to talk about that.
>> Martin: OK, OK,
let's talk about--
>> Regina: Because one
of the funniest stories
in the book is people don't
understand how manifestation
works in general.
Where all as a species
beginning to learn
that this is our creation--
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- and we can
create it the way we want.
And it doesn't have to look like
anything out of out a textbook
or like anybody else's canvas.
And you already knew that
because you're understanding
in your meditation and those
sublime experiences you had had
is that it's already here.
>> Martin: That's right.
>> Regina: In a sense
it's already happened.
You have to walk into it.
>> Martin: That's right.
>> Regina: And that is key
because most people
don't feel it.
It's already happened.
So tell us a story about
having to go to your meeting
to get this kind of incredible
monetary support and backing
with nothing but a drawing
from your babysitter.
>> Martin: That's right.
>> Regina: I love this.
>> Martin: So I-- you know,
I was just like sitting
in a house one day I
thought like, well--
you know, I need
besides the Ryka name,
we need like another
cachet or something--
>> Regina: How about a picture.
>> Martin: OK, picture
of or something like this
when I get the idea, I was
like, call the U.S. Ski team up,
you know, so they have dry--
at the time cross training
was a big thing so I was like,
let's do cross training shoes
and I called the U.S. Ski team,
can we be the official--
I didn't even have a shoe.
I didn't even have
a drawing of a shoe.
And the guy from Subaru had
just moved over from Subaru
to the U.S. Ski team,
he goes come
down to the Waldorf
[phonetic], if I'm going to be
in New York next week
I fly down there.
I didn't have any things
so I have my baby sitter
who would have-- it was like
somewhat of a kid artist,
I said, Nancy drew their shoes."
So I went-- literally went
down, it's like in a lobby
of the Waldorf with a
shoe, a drawing of shoe.
I had a letter from
Moore Shoe [phonetic]
who actually was making
L.A. Gear shoes also saying
that they would make
their shoes for us.
And I was sitting there
and I said, "You know,
I want to be the
official training shoe."
He goes, "Give me cheque
for 5000 dollars right now
and I'll give you
a seven year deal."
You know, boom, just like that.
I just took all the money I had.
I know it just like-- just about
the total-- my total savings.
I wrote a cheque
and gave to him.
I was like ecstatic
in the cab going back
to take the shuttle back
to Boston and that sort
of catapulted us to get an
underwriter who was in Denver,
all right, who there was a
female partner who owned it
>> Regina: And they did on this
picture of a shoe in an idea.
>> Martin: What they
did with shoe and I--
my ex-wife Sherry [assumed
spelling] was the--
she's the most fantastic
sales person in the world
and we said our advertising
agency would suggest to us,
why don't you just do--
for woman by woman,
just to make it a
women's only company.
So the investment
banker was like OK.
They said to me-- you know,
start selling baby food--
you know, I would do that only
because I just like listen
to what's the next thing to do.
It's like always-- one
of the things I say
on the book it's that--
>> Regina: When you meditate
>> Martin: When I meditate
it's like say is a law,
instead of a law
attraction, I'm saying it,
the law of distraction.
I say just stay with yourself,
your heart already knows
what it wants and it needs.
It doesn't need any prompting.
It doesn't need any visions just
listen and it will just send you
in a direction because it
really wants to give it to you.
You know that's problem one of
the biggest messages in the book
and allow, which is to happen
in its own time frame
and don't judge it.
So we ended up taking that
company public and instantly,
you know as the company goes
publicly we're both have tons
of money which we didn't
have before, and you know--
>> Regina: How old
are you at this time?
>> Martin: I'm like 30.
I was like 35.
I was 35 year old.
We're both basically
the same age.
And my dream, I was, "Oh,
I just want to meditate."
So it's like all of a sudden,
it's like, I'm going in my room
to meditate and my
ex-wife was like,
she had other things to do.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: She didn't
have any money.
It's like, you know?
>> Regina: Yeah, you got--
didn't have any money and
now you have tons of it.
>> Martin: Yeah, I had
tons of it so I was like--
but the thing that happened
is sort of like it ended
up splitting us apart 'cause she
want one way and the other way
and it's like, we ended
up getting divorce.
And it was like, she's not
going to leave the company
because now we're basically
based the whole image
of the company around her as the
president so I was like, "Oh,
just go take another
[inaudible]."
>> Regina: Right, yeah
a woman on company
and a product for women.
>> Martin: That's right.
>> Regina: And I remember
buying Ryka shoes back then
because I used to run a lot.
>> Martin: Yeah, and she--
>> Regina: And I thought, what's
different from a woman shoe
from a man shoe but it
sounds cool, I'm buying it.
>> Martin: Exactly.
>> Regina: So, whatever
it is, it worked.
>> Martin: Exactly, it worked
great and she was on Oprah,
she was on Today's Show,
they were in People Magazine.
I was so happy, it was like
ecstatic and it's like, OK,
let me go do another company.
So I couldn't do anything woman,
so I did this men's
intercity shoe--
>> Regina: I loved the poster.
>> Martin: Yeah, aerial assault.
>> Regina: Yeah,
that you pay in it.
>> Martin: Yeah, aerial assault.
>> Regina: And you
had people clamoring
for the product before
the product ever existed?
>> Martin: Yeah, we
were saying that,
it's like earlier before
we started filming,
I was telling the story of how,
we had all the samples made
in leather jackets and hats,
you know, it's aerial assault,
a big black letter assault.
It was all really edgies but
we went down into the ghetto
in New York and lay the-- all
the product out in the street,
in front of the stores 'cause
[inaudible] in the stores
when the kids go there, the gets
went literally they went crazy.
You know, looking at this stuff
that this investment banker
was standing there, looking,
you know, he was like, he
couldn't believe this one,
an older man walked up and say,
"You see that leather jacket.
If I have the [inaudible]
I'm a dead man."
I freaked out the investment
banker so much, he goes, "Whoa!"
I cannot take this company
public and so what am I going
to do-- I just listened again,
this is another example,
just listening.
I was like, I called the
United Negro College fund
and the National Urban League
and I went to them and said,
"Will you let us put
your logos on our boxes
and we'll give you five percent
of the profits of the company
to those organization
and I go, where they are?
We'll do it.
I was like shock that they
would do but I just got
that just got back just totally
from listening and that we end
up getting another underwriter
and then I took that
company public.
And as soon as that company went
public, it was sort of like,
I was home free at that point.
I was like--
>> Regina: As a young you
do didn't need to worry.
>> Martin: Yeah, yeah,
yeah, that was-- yeah.
>> Regina: So why
did you do it again?
>> Martin: Well, now Id had--
after Aerial Assault
went public, I was like,
that was it, that was it for me.
I basically stopped working.
That was like, 1993.
So now what ends up
happening is now--
after the second company goes
public and I'm totally retired,
I go, I'm going to build a
big, you know, mansion temple
and the statue of
Nityananda that Muktananda has
and his [foreign language],
I'm going to get that statue
who I had young Nityananda, this
other kid make for me, you know,
had it made it for me,
the identical statue.
And I have this temple now.
>> Regina: Well he was the
guru of Muktananda, right?
>> Martin: No, no.
>> Regina: Or was--
were they just--
>> Martin: Well, he was
a guru with a same name
but when Muktananda
basically died he--
before he died he
named two successors,
a brother and sister.
And he named the brother
Nityananda after his guru.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah, after
his guru, Nityananda.
>> Martin: After his guru.
>> Regina: Yeah, 'cause I
have picture of the two.
>> Martin: That's right,
the young one was the one
who basically helped me end
up getting the identical,
is the same, you know, mold
and everything [inaudible].
>> Regina: It shocking
it looks identical.
>> Martin: Oh yes.
>> Regina: If I had the picture,
I would have a hard time
telling the two apart.
The original from what you have.
>> Martin: oh yeah, yeah, yes.
It's the same molds.
So, anyway I have this big
example with the thing in there
and now I'm like a crazy
person because it's like,
I'm going to make
this, you know--
my whole life, I really
wanted to get to this point
where I can just
meditate six hours a day,
and I have the statue,
and I'm like--
I'm feeding the statue 'cause
in India they really treat
those mortis like that
>> Regina: That's
right, offerings.
>> Martin: They are real.
I mean they are alive.
They feed them three
times a day.
So I'm like I'm cooking food.
I'm eating my lunch I'm
going into-- so I'm just--
I have nothing else to do.
I'm feeding the statue,
I'm like--
and now I start holding
such satsang, you know,
a weekly program and then those
weekly programs, I'm getting up
and walking around and doing
what Muktananda did which is
like touching the
people that were there.
And people are having
experiences from that
and I thought I'm
just listening.
This is what I should
do, you know?
And I'm not having-- my entire
experience is nothing like--
and I was thinking
though, this is going
to have an effect on me.
>> Regina: No.
>> Martin: You know, nothing--
nothing whatsoever and--
>> Regina: And it just
passing on through.
>> Martin: It was just passing--
it was passing on through.
And in the midst of
me doing those I was
like probably a little
bit disappointed
that nothing was happening
and then, you know,
what's going to happen.
And all of a sudden one day,
a woman shows up at my house--
a friend of a friend and her
Byron Katie and she walked in
and she ended up staying
with me for the week
and she had a program
on that weekend.
She came to my Thursday night
program and I got up and walked
around and touched her
and touch every, you know,
touched everybody else,
as I'm sitting there
'cause I usually give it,
usually give a talk, in my
little speech, whatever it was,
I'm sitting there going like, I
don't know what the F I'm doing.
It was just like so clear.
>> Regina: That's what it told
you to do it so you did it.
>> Martin: Yes, so I did this
or that and that's why I got
to find a room I basically said
to everybody, I don't know what,
I just like let it out I
don't know what I'm doing.
There's a woman who's
visiting us from California.
She's sitting against
the wall there.
Ask her anything
you want, you know?
And the instant that I just did,
that is sort of like, through--
pass the ball to her, my mind
stop, completes stillness.
And went like that--
and we just like--
and the only thing that as
soon as the thought would come
into my mind, I just
heard the word without--
like without a thought.
I had just like this massive
believe for what I had to do
or whatever is creating
or had to anything just--
it was completely taken
off my shoulders and I was
like in the state of total
freedom and then I ended up--
you know, Katie used to come
to my house all the time it's a
picture in a book of her sitting
in a temple with the Nityananda
statue right behind her.
We did a number of
programs that were happened.
In those days--
>> Regina: So you really
kind of got her going and--
>> Martin: Well, no,
no, not-- I mean--
>> Regina: In terms of
public awareness bringing a
little support.
>> Martin: Well, with the
only thing that, yeah--
I mean I basically did pay--
just a small contribution of
paying for the initial printing
like basically loaning
the money they get.
This first book that was
written, that's not even
out there anymore, "A
Cry in the Desert."
>> Regina: Right.
>> Martin: But, you know, Katie
would come there all the time
and was this like,
you know, we--
>> Regina: You were a
wonderful brother to her.
>> Martin: Yeah-- yeah.
>> Regina: I mean, you really--
you helped each other a lot.
>> Martin: Yeah, so she
was-- and then, it was like--
but really it wasn't that much
reason to live in Boston anymore
so I'm like, I'm going to sell
the house and move to Sedona,
you know, and I would be
close to the west cost
and Katie would come from
Manhattan beach and stay
in the house in Sedona, go
back and fourth like that.
It was like great and then
I ended up meeting my wife.
>> Regina: Sweetheart Sarah.
>> Martin: My Sarah.
You know, Sarah McLean in
McLean Meditation Institute.
And I met her-- she
was working for--
working for Katie and I was
like, I'm taking her to Sedona
and then right after
I took her to Sedona,
I got Katie came and-- Kathy
and Steve and Mitchell moved
in the house right
next to us, you know?
So it's like a little bit
of party there for a year
with us all being there and
then Katie ended up going to--
moved to Ohio and do her thing.
And I was like left in, you
know, Sedona up on the hilltop
which is like-- I love it.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: Sedona is
just like so fantastic.
>> Regina: Yes, it is.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: And so you had--
the financial part of
your life was behind you.
>> Martin: Mm-hmm.
>> Regina: You were
able to live off
of the investments
residuals, et cetera.
>> Martin: Right.
>> Regina: And so now you had
something else that happened
in this process somewhere
along the way which had to do
with your body physically.
And that was interesting
the way you've handled it.
>> Martin: Oh, right, right.
>> Regina: OK.
Let's talk about--
>> Martin: Well,
I should say yeah.
So what had happened right
before I moved out to Sedona
in January of 2000, I
went down to Austin,
Texas to see my friend
Janine [assumed spelling],
my dear friend Janine and
this guy, a friend of hers
who was Pilates instructor
walked on my back, you know,
after, you know, we're all
at the party and we went back
to his house and he
looked like an S&M den
with all those Pilates
equipment on,
lying down the thing,
it's like--
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: -- you know,
he walks to my back
and he actually explodes my disc
which I don't know in the moment
but I found out a couple of days
later because all of a sudden,
I had this incredible pain in my
leg and between January and up
until July 4th, I got like
three epidural shots to try
to shrink my disc or
whatever, it wouldn't work.
And then on July 5th, the
day after the Fourth of July
at 6 o'clock in the
morning, I was operated on.
And to give me a discectomy,
just try to cut off the
little pieces of that disc.
And my daughter who was 18
at that time, just graduated
from high school, she dropped
me off at the hospital,
she's going to pick me up and
I come out of the surgery.
I was supposed to walk out right
then that day, and when I come
out of the surgery,
I'm lying in the--
what do you call
it, recovery room.
And, you know, the nurse--
so how are you feeling?
How is your legs, can you
feel your legs, blah, blah?
I can't feel my right leg,
you know, I'm like, why?
I can't feel my right leg.
Finally, they got the surgeon
over there, I was like,
when is my feeling
going to come back here.
I don't know, maybe
a week, a month,
six months, whatever like that.
It's like I-- they have
to keep me in a hospital.
They had to catheterize me.
I couldn't feel anything.
I had a walker.
And now, I'm back in my--
I had sold the house I was
living temporarily and walked
in an apartment and I was
just like totally devastated.
I mean, I could not--
>> Regina: Could you walk?
>> Martin: -- no.
I had to like swing my leg.
I had a walker--
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: -- and I like swing
but it was sort of swing my leg.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Martin: And I was just like
what have I done, you know,
what have I done
to deserve this?
And I could always
remember Katie, I love this.
One of the things
Katie would say like,
that's like if a
woman get cancer
or people get cancer
so they come to know.
So I'm going like, well OK,
my back, I cannot feel my leg,
you know, I can't feel
everything else just so--
>> Regina: Right,
but not your leg.
>> Martin: I was-- because
I tell this story a lot
of times to certain people.
I always forget to say he was
always curious about that.
>> Regina: Yeah, yeah.
Yeah-- no, everything
else was fine.
>> Martin: Everything
else is fine.
Everything else is fine so I was
so devastated and most amazing--
probably one of the most--
even more than the Kundalini
experience with So Ham
or whatever, experience
happen because I got my walker
and went out on the street.
And when I got outside
the apartment building,
I realized like--
it was in July,
I realized I couldn't get back
in because there was
a big, heavy door.
And, you know, I'm trying to get
in and there's a homeless guy
that comes down kind of a big--
you know, bag of cans, you know,
and a garbage bag,
and just hasn't been--
had a bath like in a year or
something like that, you know,
and he looks at me with
such love, and compassion,
and goes over and
opens the door for me.
And as I go in, pushed the
button to the elevator,
soon as I get in the elevator,
boom, I'm just like bowling.
You know, I am crying
and crying--
it's like this emotional
outburst I couldn't figure out.
So next-- you know, afternoon,
I walked out of my balcony,
the same type of thing happens.
So people upstairs although I
don't know, are yelling down,
"Hey, do you need any help?
Do you want us to
get you anything?"
you know, and I'd say--
>> Regina: So you had
to learn the humility
that you're receiving.
>> Martin: Yeah,
I had to receive.
I had never received in my life.
>> Regina: Yeah, right.
>> Martin: So I started
meditating and I was trying
to figure out what the
heck-- what was going on?
And I-- I kept on seeing myself
as a two years old in a crib.
And my mother saying,
"Marty, put your head
down and go to sleep."
And I realized that I
started holding a belief
that I wasn't lovable, OK,
from the time I was
really, really young.
>> Regina: And here, all
these people are now coming
to your aid, they're loving
you, the final piece you needed
in order to find
what you wanted.
>> Martin: That's
right, that's right.
So-- and then I go out into
the hallway and I'm going
down the hall, some guy
gets off the elevator
and because I have
this new understanding
without the thought I'm not
lovable and it was just light.
I felt like Jesus
was coming down
and I just could not take the
feel that's why really the name
of the field that
love comes from is
like that field is
always there all the time.
>> Regina: All of the time--
>> Martin: All the time.
We can just open ourselves
to and not, you know,
and not get in the way.
So--
>> Regina: Well, we have
about one minute left.
>> Martin: Yeah, OK.
>> Regina: Any final thought--
I mean, you've had
one of these kind
of explosive beautiful
experiences after another.
>> Martin: Yeah.
>> Regina: So just in a minute,
anything you want to
leave people with?
>> Martin: I'd say
that we are the field,
you are the field of love.
That everything that was
going on is just movement.
It seems that we're sort
of in control of the doer
and I can sort of report from my
experience of raising millions
of dollars and doing everything
I did that I never was the doer,
it was just happening.
The next thing is just to be
kind because whatever that--
for me, going back up
that pathway that I gained
over 35 years, you have to
be very kind to yourself.
And lastly, the main thing
we can do is just move
our attention.
There's so many different
practices that you can do
for meditating to healthy
yoga to other things.
Self-inquiry, I have my own
self-inquiry thing that I do.
But I think that all people
have to do is just be kind
of themself and just move
their attention to do--
and listen to do those things.
>> Regina: Indeed.
Well, what a fabulous life
and you got a lot of it to go.
I can't wait to see
what the next chapter--
>> Martin: Oh yeah.
>> Regina: -- so it sounds like
maybe you're living it already.
>> Martin: Well, I just
want to be like that.
my wife's center like I should
be handing Italian bread
and saying, you know,
tell me your story.
>> Regina: Yeah exactly.
I knew it was great bread.
>> Martin: That's my next thing.
>> Regina: Thank you Marty.
The title of Marty's book is The
Field of Love and it's power,
love, and fortune on the road
to enlightenment as a subtitle.
This is a story of a
life that is laid bare.
In the first principle as he
said as, be kind to oneself.
It's a long, intense and if
we listen, fruitful journey.
Until next time.
Thank you for joining
us here on Gaiam TV.
[ Music ]